NIP-XX
======

Audio Events
---------------

`draft` `optional`

This NIP defines a new event kind `31337` representing an audio track. These events are _parameterized replaceable_
as defined in [NIP-01](./01.md) and deletable per [NIP-09](09.md).

Unlike a `kind 1` event with audio attached, audio events are intended to be surfaced in an audio-specific context
rather than in a general micro-blogging context.

A kind `31337` event's `content` should be summary or description of the audio content.

The following tags are required:

- `d` is a unique identifier randomly generated by the client.
- `media` is the url of the media. This SHOULD NOT be read, but is required for backwards compatibility reasons.
- `imeta` is as described in [NIP 92](./92.md). Multiple `imeta` tags MAY be included to provide for different
  use cases (e.g. streaming vs download).
- `title` is the title of the audio track
- `subject` is the title of the audio track (deprecated, but required for compatibility)

The following tags are optional:

- `i` is an external GUID.
- `c` is the name of a category.
- `website` is an external url to a website related to the track.
- `duration` is the duration of the audio track, in seconds.
- `published_at` is a timestamp representing the track's original publish date.
- `genre` and `subgenre` are the names of the genre and subgenre respectively.

Events may also include one or more [NIP 32](./32.md) `l` tags for denoting people involved in the creation of the track. The value of these tags SHOULD be pubkeys, but MAY be plain text values if a pubkey is not available. If a pubkey is available, an alternative plain text value SHOULD NOT be included.

Example:

```json
{
  "id": <event_id>,
  "pubkey": <author_pubkey>,
  "created_at": <created_at>,
  "kind": 31337,
  "content": "Chill beats",
  "tags": [
    ["d", "<id>"],
    ["c", "Chill Beats"],
    ["L", "record_label"],
    ["l", "Columbia Records", "record_label"],
    ["L", "artist"],
    ["l", "2a07724d42fd8004b5c97b62ba03b6baf3919f9e8211667039987866997e97ad", "artist"],
    ["genre", "Pop"],
    ["subgenre", "EDM"],
    ["title", "Platinum Robots on the Moon"],
    ["subject", "Platinum Robots on the Moon"],
    ["published_at", "<published_at>"],
    ["imeta", "url https://example.com/my-track.m3u8 x <hash> ..."]
  ]
}
```
